# Authentication

**Authentication** is the process of verifying the identity of a user or system to ensure they are who they claim to be.

- In the authentication process, a user’s identity is verified to ensure they are who they claim to be.
- Authentication is performed before the authorization process
- It needs usually the user's login details.
- Generally, transmit information through an **ID Token**.

**Authorization** is the process of determining and granting access rights to an authenticated user or system.

- In this process, a user’s identity is verified to ensure they are who they claim to be.
- Authorization is performed after the authentication process
- It requires the user’s privileges or security levels.
- Generally, transmit information through an **Access Token**.

---

# OAuth 2.0

Open Authorization - designed to allow a website or application to access resources hosted by other web apps on behalf of a user.
OAuth 2.0 is an authorization protocol and NOT an authentication protocol - use **Access Token**

## Roles

- Resource Owner
- Client
- Authorization Server
- Resource Server

## Access Tokens and Authorization Code

- The OAuth 2 Authorization server may not directly return an Access Token after the Resource Owner has authorized access.
- Instead, and for better security, an **Authorization Code** may be returned, which is then exchanged for an **Access Token**.
- In addition, the Authorization server may also issue a **Refresh Token**(Long expiry time, need to store securely) with the Access Token.

## Working

- Client Request authorization from the Authorization server with credentials
- Authorization server authenticates the client
- Resource owner interacts with the Authorization server to grant access
- Authorization server redirects back to the Client with Auth code/Access token/Refersh token
- Client requests access to the resource from the Resource server

## Grant Types

- Authorization Code grant
- Implicit Grant
- Authorization Code Grant with Proof Key for Code Exchange (PKCE)
- Resource Owner Credentials Grant Type
- Client Credentials Grant Type
- Device Authorization Flow
- Refresh Token Grant

---

# JSON Web Token (JWT)

Secure way to send information between a client and a server

**Cryptographic methods**

- HMAC (Hash-based Message Authentication Code)
- RSA or ECDSA (Asymmetric cryptographic algorithms)

## JWT Structure

Three parts, separated by dots (.)
`Header. Payload. Signature`

- **Header**: Contains metadata about the token, such as the algorithm used for signing.
- **Payload**: Stores the claims, i.e., data being transmitted.
- **Signature**: Ensures the token's integrity and authenticity.

**Examples**

```
-- Header
{
    "alg": "HS256",
    "typ": "JWT"
}

-- Payload
{
    "userId": 123,
    "role": "admin",
    "exp": 1672531199
}

-- Signature
HMACSHA256(
    base64UrlEncode(header) + "." + base64UrlEncode(payload),
    secret
)
```

**Final JWT token** - Joining the Header, Payload and Signature via a dot

## Working

**Base64URL** encoding

- Login Request
- Server Generates JWT
- Returns JWT
- Further Requests with JWT

## Security Considerations

- Use HTTPS
- Set Expiration Time
- Use Secure Storage
- Verify Signature

---

# Session Based Authentication

- Interact with their account without continually specifying their credentials, ex : web applications
- A session is a small file, most likely in JSON format, that stores information about the user, such as a unique ID, time of login and expirations, and so on.
- Stored in server, cookies will be sent in new request by users, and that will be identified by server.

## Process:

- User sends login request
- Server validates credentials, creates session in database, sends session ID to user (via a cookie)
- For subsequent requests, user sends cookie with session ID
- Server looks up session ID in its storage; if valid, authorizes request

**Pros** - Full control to server
**Cons** - Scalability Issue

# Token Based Authentication

- Interact with their account without continually specifying their credentials, ex : server to server connections
- A token is an authorization file that cannot be tampered with.
- It is generated by the server using a secret key, sent to and stored by the user in their local storage.
- Like in the case of cookies, the user sends this token to the server with every new request

## Process:

- User sends login request
- Server verifies credentials, issues a token (e.g. JWT) to client
- Client stores token and sends it with each subsequent request
- Server verifies the token’s signature / validity (no session lookup)

**Pros** - Reduce Server Loads
**Cons** - No control for Server, weaker algorithms risk breaches, security issues

# Role-Based Access Control (RBAC)

- RBAC is a security model that grants end-user access to systems, applications, and data based on predefined roles. Permissions are tied to roles, and users are assigned roles.
- Simple, Scalable, Secure

## Core components

- Users
- Roles
- Permissions
- Role assignments

## Working

- Define Roles based on job functions.
- Assign Permissions to Roles as needed (grant only required permissions).
- Assign Users to Roles so they inherit those permissions.
- Access Control Enforcement: when a user tries to access a resource, the system checks user - roles - permissions - allows/denies.
- Modify Roles or Permissions as Needed when responsibilities change.
- Audit & Monitor all access to ensure security, compliance, and traceability.

# Single Sign On (SSO)

SSO is an authentication mechanism that allows a user to log in once with one set of credentials (username/password) and then access multiple applications/websites without having to re-authenticate each one.

## Working

- User visits an application. Check: is the user already authenticated via SSO?
- If yess, allow access.
- If no: redirect user to the SSO identity provider/login portal.
- User enters credentials (on SSO provider).
- SSO provider verifies credentials (**SSO Token)**(maybe via an identity store, directory service) and sends back verification to the SSO system.
- SSO produces a token (or assertion) which is given to the application. This token verifies that the user is authenticated.
- When the user moves to other associated application(s), the token is used for authentication there, without re-login.

## Types

- Kerberos-based SSO
- SAML-based SSO
- Smart card-based SSO
- Social SSO
- Enterprise SSO (eSSO)
